Wilms tumor 06- clustering exploration (#750)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: analyses/cell-type-wilms-tumor-06/notebook_template/03_clustering_exploration.Rmd

In addition to the list of known marker genes, we used an unbiased approach to find transcripts that characterized the different clusters.
We run DElegate::FindAllMarkers2 to find markers of the different clusters and manually check if they do make sense. 
DElegate::FindAllMarkers2 is an improved version of Seurat::FindAllMarkers based on pseudobulk differential expression method. 
Please check the preprint from Chistoph Hafemeister: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.28.534443v1
and tool described here: https://github.com/cancerbits/DElegate 

Of note, we won't use it for annotation, this is just here to get an idea!

```{r fig.width=10, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}
feature_conversion <- srat@assays$RNA@meta.data
de_results   <- DElegate::FindAllMarkers2(srat, group_column = "seurat_clusters")
#filter the most relevant markers
s.markers <- de_results[de_results$padj < params$padj_thershold & de_results$log_fc > params$lfc_threshold & de_results$rate1 > params$rate1_threshold,]
# add gene symbol for easiest interpretation of the result
s.markers$gene_ids <- s.markers$feature
s.markers <- left_join(s.markers,feature_conversion, by = c( "gene_ids") )

> identical(s.markers$feature, s.markers$gene_ids)     # check the quality of the merge, must be true

Reviewer: Let's turn this into a _check_ instead of just printing. If this is FALSE, we'd like to know about it!

This will cause an error ("stop if not true") if the statement is not true, and print that error message.

```suggestion
stopifnot(
  "Error joining gene ids and feature names" = identical(s.markers$feature, s.markers$gene_ids)   
)
```

> DT::datatable(s.markers, caption = ("marker genes"), 

Reviewer: Let's split up this chunk since it's a bit long, and put this `DT` in its own chunk. Then, have _one more_ chunk below for the heatmap code.

E2F/proliferation should be enriched in blastema cluster.
MYC(N), TP53 must be enriched in blastema cluster.

#### C8 MSiGDB cell type signature gene sets

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=25, out.width='100%'}
Enrichment_plot(category = "C8", signatures = signatures, background = background)
```

The MSigDB C8 gene set is quite relevant for kidney and nephroblastoma annotations. 
Epithelial (cancer and normal) cells should be enriched in mature/adulte kidney pathways while blastema cancer cells will show enrichment of fetal kidney development pathway / cap mesenchyme. 

### Cell annotation

#### Annotation from SingleR (no cancer or kidney specific dataset)

Here, we quickly checked annotations that are present in the _processed rds object. 
However, the automated annotation have not been performed using a cancer specific reference or a kidney reference. 
We do not expect a nice labelling of the cells as the overlap of cell types between the reference and the query dataset is poor. 
This support the need to do a proper label transfer from the fetal kidney atlas, which is imho the best reference that can be applied to a Wilms tumor query. 

> ```{r fig.width=15, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}

Reviewer: The title doesn't fully fit here, so can you make the `fig.width=20` instead of 15 for **all chunks** (here and below) that use the `visualize_metadata()` function?

```{r fig.width=10, fig.height=4, out.width='100%'}
do_Table_Heatmap <- function(data, first_group, last_group ){
  
  df <- data@meta.data %>%
  mutate_if(sapply(data@meta.data, is.character), as.factor)  %>% 
  group_by( !!sym(first_group), !!sym(last_group))%>% 
  summarise(Nb = log(n())) 

p <- ggplot(df, aes(x= !!sym(first_group), y = !!sym(last_group), fill = Nb)) +
   geom_tile() +
   scale_fill_viridis_c()  +
   theme_bw() +
   theme(text = element_text(size = 20)) +
   theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5, hjust=1)) +
   guides(fill=guide_legend(title=" Number of \n cells (log)"))

return(p)
}
```

## Analysis

### Load the pre-processed `Seurat` object
```{r load, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
# open the processed rds object
srat <- readRDS(file.path(result_dir, paste0("02b-fetal_kidney_label-transfer_",params$sample_id,".Rds")))
DefaultAssay(srat) <- "SCT"
```

### Visualize seurat clusters

We expect up to 5 set of clusters:

- blastema cancer cells
- epithelium cancer and/or normal cells
- stroma cancer and/or normal cells
- immune cells
- endothelial cells

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}

> d2 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="umap", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - umap")
> d1 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="pca", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - pca")

Reviewer: Let's just flip this order...
```suggestion
d1 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="pca", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - pca")
d2 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="umap", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - umap")
```

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=8, out.width='100%'}

Enrichment_plot(category = "H", signatures = signatures, background = background)
 
```

EMT signature should be enriched in stroma cluster.
E2F/proliferation should be enriched in blastema cluster.
MYC(N), TP53 must be enriched in blastema cluster.

#### C8 MSiGDB cell type signature gene sets

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=25, out.width='100%'}
Enrichment_plot(category = "C8", signatures = signatures, background = background)
```

The MSigDB C8 gene set is quite relevant for kidney and nephroblastoma annotations. 
Epithelial (cancer and normal) cells should be enriched in mature/adulte kidney pathways while blastema cancer cells will show enrichment of fetal kidney development pathway / cap mesenchyme. 

### Cell annotation

#### Annotation from SingleR (no cancer or kidney specific dataset)

Here, we quickly checked annotations that are present in the _processed rds object. 
However, the automated annotation have not been performed using a cancer specific reference or a kidney reference. 
We do not expect a nice labelling of the cells as the overlap of cell types between the reference and the query dataset is poor. 

> This support the need to do a proper label transfer from the fetal kidney atlas, which is imho the best reference that can be applied to a Wilms tumor query. 

Reviewer: Eventually we will run spell check on these documents, so just anticipating this change :) 

```suggestion
This support the need to do a proper label transfer from the fetal kidney atlas, which appears to be the best reference that can be applied to a Wilms tumor query. 
```

In the previous step of the analysis, we selected two fetal references containing kidney samples and transfer the labels. 

Here we aim to understand the overlap and differences between the two references. 

##### Human fetal kidney atlas Stewart et al.

Stewart et al. created a [human fetal kidney atlas](https://www.kidneycellatlas.org/) [[3](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aat5031)]. 

This reference contains only fetal kidney cells and has been precisely annotated by kidney experts. 

##### Azimuth Human fetal atlas Cao et al.

`Azimuth` also provides a human fetal atlas as a reference [[4](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aba7721)].

The data can be found on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/4738021#.YJIW4C2ZNQI).

The reference contain cells from 15 organs including kidney from fetal samples.

We were first nicely surprised that most of the cells in the Wilms tumor dataset mapped to "kidney" organ (see previous report `02a_fetal_all_reference_Cao_{sample_id}.html`). 

##### first level annotation

> ```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=8, out.width='100%'}

Reviewer: these are a bit small, so let's increase the height
```suggestion
```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=15, out.width='100%'}
```

p1 <- do_Table_Heatmap( srat,
                            last_group = "fetal_kidney_predicted.compartment",
                            first_group = "fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l1"
                             
                            )
p2 <- do_Table_Heatmap( srat,
                            last_group = "fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type",
                            first_group = "fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l1"
                          
                            )
p1|p2
```

##### second level annotation

> ```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=8, out.width='100%'}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=15, out.width='100%'}
```

p2 <- do_Table_Heatmap( srat,
                            last_group = "fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type",
                            first_group = "fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l2"
                             
                            )
p2
```

> 

Reviewer: Can you also add two more heatmaps? Pick the fetal reference you plan to use next, and compare it to both singler and cellassign. Thanks!

Author: sure! :)

                  b <- SCpubr::do_ViolinPlot(srat, 
                                             features = feature_symbol$ENSEMBL, 
                                             ncol = 1, 
                                             group.by = group.by, 
                                             legend.position = "none",
                                             assay = "SCT") + ylab(feature_symbol$SYMBOL)
                   
                  return(d + b + plot_layout(ncol = 2, widths = c(2,4))) 
}
          
 
```

#### Calculate `ModuleScore` from a `MSigDB` dataset

For a Seurat object `object`, the function `MSigDB_score` will calculate a score using `AddModuleScore()` function for a MSigDB gene set `gs_name` in the category `category`

- `object` is the Seurat object to calculate the score. 
Score will be added in the metadata of this object.

- `category` is a MSigDB collection (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/collections.jsp).
values in `c("H", "C1", "C2", "C3", "C4", "C5", "C6", "C7", "C8")`

- `gs_name` is the name of a MSigDB gene set, e.g. `"HALLMARK_P53_PATHWAY"`

- `name` is the name of the module

> 

Reviewer: Here we'll add an argument for bins to pass into `AddModuleScore`

```suggestion

- `nbins` is the number of bins for `AddModuleScore` to use. Its default value is 24, which matches Seurat's default value.
```

```{r }

> MSigDB_score <- function(object, category, gs_name, name){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MSigDB_score <- function(object, category, gs_name, name, nbin = 24){
```

  
        set <- msigdbr(species = "human", category = category)
        set_list <- set %>% 
                    dplyr::filter(gs_name == gs_name) %>%
                    dplyr::distinct(gs_name, gene_symbol, human_ensembl_gene) %>% as.data.frame()
        set_list <- list(set_list$human_ensembl_gene)
       suppressWarnings({

>             object <- AddModuleScore(object, features = set_list, name = name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            object <- AddModuleScore(object, features = set_list, name = name, nbin = nbin)
```

   
}

```

#### do_Table_Heatmap

`do_Table_Heatmap` shows heatmap of counts of cells for combinations of two metadata variables

- `data` seurat object 
- `first_group` is the name of the first metadata to group the cells
- `last_group` is the name of the second metadata to group the cells

```{r fig.width=10, fig.height=4, out.width='100%'}
do_Table_Heatmap <- function(data, first_group, last_group ){
  
  df <- data@meta.data %>%
  mutate_if(sapply(data@meta.data, is.character), as.factor)  %>% 
  group_by( !!sym(first_group), !!sym(last_group))%>% 
  summarise(Nb = log(n())) 

p <- ggplot(df, aes(x= !!sym(first_group), y = !!sym(last_group), fill = Nb)) +
   geom_tile() +
   scale_fill_viridis_c()  +
   theme_bw() +
   theme(text = element_text(size = 20)) +
   theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5, hjust=1)) +
   guides(fill=guide_legend(title=" Number of \n cells (log)"))

return(p)
}
```

## Analysis

### Load the pre-processed `Seurat` object
```{r load, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
# open the processed rds object
srat <- readRDS(file.path(result_dir, paste0("02b-fetal_kidney_label-transfer_",params$sample_id,".Rds")))

> DefaultAssay(srat) <- "SCT"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DefaultAssay(srat) <- "SCT"

# Add number of bins to use with Seurat::AddModuleScore().
# One sample in this project fails with the default number of bins, so we need to override it
if (params$sample_id == "SCPCS000197") {
  seurat_nbins <- 23 # default is 24, so this is very close
} else {
  seurat_nbins <- 24
}
```

- blastema cancer cells
- epithelium cancer and/or normal cells
- stroma cancer and/or normal cells
- immune cells
- endothelial cells

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}
d1 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="pca", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - pca")
d2 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(srat, reduction="umap", group.by = "seurat_clusters", label = TRUE) + ggtitle("Seurat Cluster - umap")
v1 <- SCpubr::do_ViolinPlot(srat, features = c( "subsets_mito_percent"), ncol = 1, group.by = "seurat_clusters", legend.position = "none") 
v2 <- SCpubr::do_ViolinPlot(srat, features = c( "detected"), ncol = 1, group.by = "seurat_clusters", legend.position = "none") 
v3 <- SCpubr::do_ViolinPlot(srat, features = c( "sum"), ncol = 1, group.by = "seurat_clusters", legend.position = "none") 

d1 + d2 + (v1 + v2 +v3 + plot_layout(ncol=1) ) + plot_layout(ncol = 3, widths = c(2,2,4))
```

### Cell cycle information
```{r cell_cycle}
s.genes <- srat@assays$RNA@meta.data$gene_ids[srat@assays$RNA@meta.data$gene_symbol %in% cc.genes$s.genes]
g2m.genes <- srat@assays$RNA@meta.data$gene_ids[srat@assays$RNA@meta.data$gene_symbol %in% cc.genes$g2m.genes]

> srat <- CellCycleScoring(srat, s.features = s.genes, g2m.features = g2m.genes, set.ident = FALSE)

Reviewer: This function uses AddModuleScore and allows us to pass in binning:

```suggestion
srat <- CellCycleScoring(srat, s.features = s.genes, g2m.features = g2m.genes, set.ident = FALSE, nbin = seurat_nbins)
```

```

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=4, out.width='100%'}
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "Phase", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
```

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=2.5, out.width='100%'}
visualize_metadata(srat, meta  = "S.Score", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "G2M.Score", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
```

### Look at specific genes

Here, we open the table of marker genes marker-sets/CellType_metadata.csv. 
Note: we do not expect to have a clear and nice pattern of expression for all of the following markers in every tumor. 
This is just ti get a few idea.

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=4, out.width='100%'}
for(feature in CellType_metadata$ENSEMBL_ID[CellType_metadata$ENSEMBL_ID %in% rownames(srat@assays$SCT)]){
   print(visualize_feature(srat, features = feature, group.by = "seurat_clusters"))
}
```

### Look at specific pathways

#### TP53 pathway

here we will calculate a TP53 score using `AddModuleScore` and the genes of the HALLMARK_P53_PATHWAY gene set.

```{r fig.height=4, fig.width=20, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}

> srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "H", gs_name = "HALLMARK_P53_PATHWAY", name = "TP53_score")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "H", gs_name = "HALLMARK_P53_PATHWAY", name = "TP53_score", nbin = seurat_nbins)
```

visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "TP53_score1", group.by = "seurat_clusters" )
```

#### DNA repair pathway

here we will calculate a DNA_repair score using `AddModuleScore` and the genes of the HALLMARK_DNA_REPAIR gene set.

```{r fig.height=4, fig.width=20, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}

> srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "H", gs_name = "HALLMARK_DNA_REPAIR", name = "DNA_repair_score")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "H", gs_name = "HALLMARK_DNA_REPAIR", name = "DNA_repair_score", nbin = seurat_nbins)
```

visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "DNA_repair_score1", group.by = "seurat_clusters" )
```

Note: Chemo-treated samples should have higher DNA-damage scores.

#### DROSHA target genes

```{r fig.height=4, fig.width=20, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}

> srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "C3", gs_name = "DROSHA_TARGET_GENES", name = "DROSHA_score")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "C3", gs_name = "DROSHA_TARGET_GENES", name = "DROSHA_score", nbin = seurat_nbins)
```

visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "DROSHA_score1", group.by = "seurat_clusters" )
```

#### DICER1 target genes

```{r fig.height=4, fig.width=20, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}

> srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "C3", gs_name = "DICER1_TARGET_GENES", name = "DICER1_score")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
srat <- MSigDB_score(object = srat , category = "C3", gs_name = "DICER1_TARGET_GENES", name = "DICER1_score", nbin = seurat_nbins)
```

    The label transfer have been performed in the notebook `02a_fetal_full_reference_Cao_{sample_id}.Rmd`
    
    + Using the human fetal kidney atlas: 
    [Stewart et al.](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aat5031) created a [human fetal kidney atlas](https://www.kidneycellatlas.org/). 
    This reference contains only fetal kidney cells and has been precisely annotated by kidney experts. 
    The label transfer have been performed in the notebook `02b_fetal_kidney_reference_Stewart_{sample_id}.Rmd`

#### Annotation from SingleR (no cancer or kidney specific dataset)

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "singler_celltype_annotation", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
```

#### Annotation from cellassign (no cancer or kidney specific dataset)

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "cellassign_celltype_annotation", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
```

#### Annotation from the fetal reference (Cao et al)

The fetal full reference (Cao et al.) provides three levels of annotations:

- `fetal_full_predicted.organ` is one of the 15 organs used for building the reference. 

> We were nicely surprised that most of the cells from the Wilms tumor cohort maped to fetal kidney cells. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We were nicely surprised that, for many of the samples, most of the cells from the Wilms tumor cohort mapped to fetal kidney cells. 
```

- `fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l1` holds predicted cell type annotation

- `fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l2` holds the combination of the predicted organ and predicted cell type annotation

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=10, out.width='100%'}
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "fetal_full_predicted.organ", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l1", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
visualize_metadata(srat, meta = "fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l2", group.by = "seurat_clusters")
```

#### Annotation from the kidney reference (Stewart et al)

The fetal kidney reference (Stewart et al.) provides two levels of annotations:

- `fetal_kidney_predicted.compartment` is one of the 4 main compartments composing a fetal kidney.
We expect immune and endothelial cells to be healthy (non-canerous) cells identified easily with high confidency. 
We expect stroma and fetal nephron compartment to contain both normal and malignant cells.

    
    - `immune` cells
    
    - `stroma` cells
    
    - `fetal_nephron` cells
    
    - `endothelial` cells
    

> - `fetal_full_predicted.annotation.l1` holds predicted cell type annotations that details further the four compartments, as for example:

Reviewer: This is a typo, right?

```suggestion
- `fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type` holds predicted cell type annotations that details further the four compartments, as for example:
```

Author: good catch!!

---
title: "Clustering exploration for `r params$sample_id`"
author: "Maud PLASCHKA"
date: '2024-08-13'
params:
  scpca_project_id: "SCPCP000006"
  sample_id: "SCPCS000176"
  seed: 12345
  padj_thershold: 0.05  # Threshold for adjusted p-value
  lfc_threshold: 1      # Threshold for log fold change
  rate1_threshold: 0.5  # Threshold for rate (percentage) of cells expressing the marker genes in group1
output: 
  html_document: 
    toc: yes
    toc_float: yes
    code_folding: hide
    highlight: pygments
    df_print: paged
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE,
                      message=FALSE,
                      warnings=FALSE
                      )
```

## Introduction

The aim is to explore the clustering and label transfers for the sample `r params$sample_id`.

> 

Reviewer: This suggestion goes along with a recommendation I made in my overall review comment.

```suggestion
This sample has a(n) `r favorable` subdiagnosis.
```

                      plot.title = ggplot2::element_text(face = "bold", hjust = 0),
                      plot.subtitle = ggplot2::element_text(hjust = 0),
                      plot.caption = ggplot2::element_text(hjust = 1),
                      panel.grid = ggplot2::element_blank(),
                      text = ggplot2::element_text(family = font.type),
                      plot.caption.position = "plot",
                      legend.text = ggplot2::element_text(face = "bold"),
                      legend.position = "none",
                      legend.title = ggplot2::element_text(face = "bold"),
                      legend.justification = "center",
                      plot.margin = ggplot2::margin(t = 10, r = 10, b = 10, l = 10),
                      plot.background = ggplot2::element_rect(fill = "white", color = "white"),
                      panel.background = ggplot2::element_rect(fill = "white", color = "white"),
                      legend.background = ggplot2::element_rect(fill = "white", color = "white"),
                      strip.text =ggplot2::element_text(color = "black", face = "bold"))

  return(p)
}
```

#### do_Table_Heatmap

> `do_Table_Heatmap` shows heatmap of counts of cells in groups of metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`do_Table_Heatmap` shows heatmap of counts of cells for combinations of two metadata variables
```
